
A critical section is a segment of code which can be accessed by a signal process at a specific point of time. The section consists of shared data resources that required to be accessed by other processes.

In the critical section, only a single process can be executed. Other processes, waiting to execute their critical section, need to wait until the current process completes its execution.


The critical section need to must enforce all

Mutual Exclusion: Mutual Exclusion is a special type of binary semaphore which is used for controlling access to the shared resource. It includes a priority inheritance mechanism to avoid extended priority inversion problems. Not more than one process can execute in its critical section at one time.

Progress: This solution is used when no one is in the critical section, and someone wants in. Then those processes not in their reminder section should decide who should go in, in a finite time.

Bound Waiting: When a process makes a request for getting into critical section, there is a specific limit about number of processes can get into their critical section. So, when the limit is reached, the system must allow request to the process to get into its critical section.


some widely used methods to solve the critical section problem.
 
Peterson Solution: Before entering into the critical section, a process inquires about the lock. If it is locked, it keeps on waiting till it becomes free and if it is not locked, it takes the lock and executes the critical section.

Synchronization Hardware: Some times the problems of the Critical Section are also resolved by hardware. Some operating system offers a lock functionality where a Process acquires a lock when entering the Critical section and releases the lock after leaving it.

Mutex Locks: Synchronization hardware not simple method to implement for everyone, so strict software method known as Mutex Locks was also introduced.

Semaphore is simply a variable that is non-negative and shared between threads. It is another algorithm or solution to the critical section problem. It is a signaling mechanism and a thread that is waiting on a semaphore, which can be signaled by another thread.